---
layout: default
title: "CS402: Computer Communications and Networks"
course_description: "A detailed introduction to the basic hardware, software, and architectural components of computer communications in local area networks. Focuses on understanding the basics of computer networks, switching, routing, protocols, and security."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "CS402: Computer Communications and Networks"
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The Internet has become one of the most important components of our
life. We browse the Web, check e-mails, make VoIP phone calls, and have
video conferences via computers. All of these applications are made
possible by networking computers together, and this complex network of
computers is usually referred to as the Internet. This course is
designed to give you a clear understanding of how networks, from in-home
local area networks, or LANS, to the massive and global Internet, are
built and how they allow us to use computers to share information and
communicate with one another. Unit 1 introduces you to an explanation of
what computer networks are as well as to some basic terminology
fundamental to understanding computer networks. You will also
familiarize yourself with the concept of layers, which compose the
framework around which networks are built. Next, Unit 2 explains the
concept of protocols. A computer communication (or network) protocol
defines rules and conventions for communication between network devices.
The rest of the course implements a top-down approach to teach you the
details about each layer and the relevant protocols used in computer
networks. Beginning in Unit 3, you will explore the concept of
application layer protocols, which include the Domain Name System,
e-mail protocols, and the Hypertext Transfer Protocol. Unit 3 ends with
an overview of how to use socket programming to develop network
applications. In Unit 4, you will learn transport layer protocols,
including the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the User Datagram
Protocol (UDP). You will go on to study the network layer Internet
Protocol (IP) and packet routing protocols in Unit 5. Next is Unit 6,
which is devoted to a discussion on link layer protocols, and the course
concludes with an overview on voice and video protocols, network
security, and cloud computing in Unit 7. As you move through the course,
take time to notice how the layers build on top of one another and work
together to create the amazing tool of computer networks, which many of
us depend upon daily. This course is designed to align with a Thomas
Edison State College TECEP examination. Visit the [TECEP
website](http://www2.tesc.edu/listalltecep.php), and click on “Network
Technology (CMP-354-TE)” to download the content guide for the exam.
 For more information about this partnership, and earning credit through
Thomas Edison State College,
go [here](http://www.saylor.org/student-credit-pathways/thomas-edison-state-college/).
![Thomas Edison State
College](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/TESC-Logo-Small.png "Thomas Edison State College")

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:

-   describe the architecture of a computer network and explain how each
    device in a network communicates with each other;
-   describe the processes in each layer of the network protocol that
    enables different networks to share resources;
-   describe the basic network protocols in each layer of a TCP/IP stack
    and the purpose of each protocol;
-   recognize and differentiate between the various services and
    functionalities of specific mechanisms in each protocol and their
    usage in a computer network;
-   explain the role of the Network Request for Comment (RFC);
-   compare and contrast each layer in the TCP/IP model with those in
    the OSI model;
-   define socket programming and explain its role in application
    processing;
-   describe IP addressing and explain its purpose;
-   explain packet collisions and how they are corrected in the link
    layer;
-   define CSMA and describe its use in the link layer;
-   describe and compare application protocols such as VoIP and IPTV;
    and
-   explain TCP/IP security related issues.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    have access to a computer;  
  
 √    have continuous broadband Internet access;  
  
 √    have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (Adobe
Reader, Flash, etc.);  
  
 √    have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer;  
  
 √    have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.);  
  
 √    have competency in the English language;  
  
 √    have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf);
and  
  
 √    have knowledge of the fundamental computer terminology covered in
an introduction to computing course, such as *hardware*, *software*, and
*Internet*.

### Course Information

Welcome to CS402: Local Area Networks. General information about this
course and its requirements can be found below.  
    
 **Course Designer:** Dr. Rose Wise, Network Administrator  
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course is comprised of a range of different
free online materials. However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:

-   Université Catholique de Louvaine: Olivier Bonaventure’s Computer
    Networking: Principles, Protocols, and
    Practice ([PDF](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Computer-Networking-Principles-Bonaventure-1-30-31-OTC1.pdf),
    [EPUB](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/ComputerNetworkingPrinciples_v2.epub))
-   Massachussets Institute of Technology OpenCourseWare: Prof. Hari
    Balakrishnan’s [“Computer
    Networks”](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-829-computer-networks-fall-2002/lecture-notes/)
-   [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page)
-   Zytrax.com: Ronald Aitchison’s [Pro DNS and
    BIND](http://www.zytrax.com/books/dns/)

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials,
including the exercises and the final exam.  
    
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your final exam.
In order to pass this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher on
the final exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as you
complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
    
 **Time Commitment:** Completing this course will take approximately
**105.25 hours**. Each unit includes a time advisory that lists the
amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit. These should
help you plan your time accordingly. It may be useful to take a look at
these time advisories, determine how much time you have over the next
few weeks to complete each unit, and then set goals for yourself. For
example, Unit 1 should take you 4 hours. Perhaps you can sit down with
your calendar and decide to complete Subunit 1.1 (a total of 3 hours) on
Monday and Tuesday nights; Subunit 1.2 (a total of 1 hour) on Wednesday
night; etc.  
    
 **Tips/Suggestions:** Review the home page and Preface/Chapter 1 of the
textbook for this course, *Computer Networking: Principles, Protocols,
and Practice *(CNP3)**,** for information about the learning tools
available with the book.  
    
 The outline in the left margin enables you to click back to previous
sections should you want to review them. If several days pass before you
proceed to the next section, you may want to review outlines for the
completed sections.  
    
 Chapters 2-6 in the CNP3 textbook each contain a summary as well as
exercises to further reinforce your learning.  
    
 As with all online/interactive documents, each section in your textbook
contains hyperlinks to additional information. These links are part of
your reading assignment. Thus, information contained in hyperlinks has
been factored into learning outcomes and are included in the final exam
questions.  
    
 One of the goals of the textbook is to tie standards to actual
technology. Links to a Request for Comments (RFC) accomplish this
purpose. While this course does not require you to memorize all of the
RFCs referenced in the readings, you are encouraged to peruse these
links for additional background and insight into the standards
supporting the evolution of network technologies.  
    
 Your textbook has done a good job of covering computer network concepts
by introducing and discussing a large number of terms. You may want to
create your own list of terms for each section with their definition and
acronym (abbreviation) as you study since not all terms are in the
textbook’s
[Glossary](https://scm.info.ucl.ac.be/release/cnp3/Book/0.2/html/glossary.html).

### Preliminary Information

-   **Open Textbook Challenge Winner: *Computer Networking: Principles,
    Protocol, and Practice***

    *Computer Networking: Principles, Protocol, and Practice *was
    written and submitted to the Open Textbook Challenge by Dr. Olivier
    Bonaventure of the Université Catholique de Louvain (UCL) in
    Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. Dr. Bonaventure also serves as the
    Education Director of ACM SIGCOMM. *Computer Networking* has already
    been used by several universities around the world, including UCL.  
        
     Olivier Bonaventure’s *Computer Networking: Principles, Protocols,
    and Practice*
    ([PDF](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Computer-Networking-Principles-Bonaventure-1-30-31-OTC1.pdf), [EPUB](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/ComputerNetworkingPrinciples_v2.epub))


